Masqmail README
===============

Masqmail is a mail server designed for hosts that are not permanently
connected to the internet. It handles outgoing messages, i.e. those
that are to be sent over the non-permanent link (usually a ppp or slip
connection over a modem or ISDN adapter) specially and delivers them
only when explicitely told to do so. There is support for multiple
providers, it is possible to write different configurations for each
one. The configuration chosen is selected at delivery time, so that if
for example a delivery of a message failed while connected with
provider 1, it may be delivered when connected to provider 2. For each
provider another mail host (or none) can be specified.

Masqmail provides (a yet simple) mechanism to rewrite headers, also
depending on the current connection. This makes it possible to deliver
messages with a return address on the local network which will be
rewitten at delivery time. The purpose of this is:

- to allow delivery failure messages that are produced on the local
network to be delivered immediately, while those that are produced
outside can be delivered to a mailbox on the internet, to be retrieved
later.

- to give mail servers a return address which they can accept if they
check for spam mail. Many mail servers require a return address which
has the same domain as the server it is getting the message from. If
you normally connect to only one provider, this is usually not a
problem as you can configure your mailer to a fixed address (but then
there is still the problem with the failure messages...), but it is a
problem if you use different ones from time to time.

Masqmail shall once be a complete replacement for sendmail (or other
MTAs such as exim, qmail or smail) on a local network, but it is NOT
supposed to be installed in a network with a permanent internet
connection (at least if it is not behind a secure firewall) because
it has no ability to check for undesired relaying or spam filtering.


Masqmail's website is:

	http://marmaro.de/prog/masqmail

The email address of it's mailing list is:

	<masqmail@marmaro.de>

To subscribe yourself to the list, send a mail with the subject
``subscribe masqmail'' to <minimalist@marmaro.de>. The mailing list
archive is accessible at: http://lists.marmaro.de/masqmail/ . If you
have any problems, contact me: markus schnalke <meillo@marmaro.de>.


INSTALLATION
------------

For installation instructions, see INSTALL.


BUGS
----

There are probably a lot of bugs in masqmail. Please report any one you
discover to me. The more bug reports I get, the better masqmail will
get.

See docs/howto-report-bugs for detailed instructions.


CREDITS
-------

I would like to thank everyone who has submitted suggestions and bug
reports.

See THANKS.



This file was originally written by by Oliver Kurth <oku@masqmail.cx>.
Later updated and extended by markus schnalke <meillo@marmaro.de>.
