Here a two test programs: local.sh and smtpout.sh. They both send
three mails, using different options. Run them from within this
directory, preferably NOT as root, but you got to have write
permission for this directory.

local.sh sends mail accepted from stdin and sends them to a fake local
mailbox, using your login name. If it works, there should be a file
named with your login name with the mails. You can look at it with cat
or less, or with an ordinary mail program.

smtpout.sh sends mail accepted from stdin and sends them to your local
MTA, so use it only if you have an MTA running on your box (sendmail,
exim, qmail or whatever, or masqmail when you have it already
installed). If it works, you should get three mails.

The scripts assume that your login name corresponds to your mailbox
(quite probable) and that your MTA listens on port 25 with the
interface which corresponds to the hostname as returned by the shell
command "hostname" (without quotes...), also very probable. They are
created with make from test.templ. They use a special configuration
(test.conf) for masqmail, which is also created with make from
conf.templ.

Two log files, masqmail.log and debug.log will also be created within
this directory. They may give some information if anything went wrong.

If the log files reveal that your MTA is not willing to relay, you may
have to qualify the hostname: Say

sed s/RECV_HOST/foo.bar.com/ test.templ > smtpout.sh

where you set your fully qualified host name for foo.bar.com.

If they do not work, there could be some problem with either the test
programs, the configuration file or masqmail itself. If you have
installed masqmail successfully and these scripts do not work, do not
worry too much :-).
