This document includes UUCP related information

Note: My knowledge of UUCP setups is very poor. I hope that the
      provided information is correct. Improvements to this document
      are very welcome.  --meillo

UUCP setups call the MTA as `rmail'. Until version 0.2.23 masqmail
could be called with this name. It switched to read-message-from-stdin
mode then. AFAIK this is not enough to support UUCP, at least not at
the level that is presumed by UUCP software. It seems as if at least
the first input line should be handled special as it includes the
envelope recipient. (Correct me if I'm wrong.)

A better, through still basic approach, was introduced with 0.2.24:
misc/rmail is a small shell script (taken from postfix), which calls
masqmail with appropriate options. Copy the script into your path and
ensure that the included sendmail variable points to the masqmail
executable.

A more sophisticated rmail implementation seems to be available from
sendmail. I don't know details about it and whether it is needed. The
difference of sendmail's rmail implementation could be related to
address rewriting (user@example.org <-> org!example!user). But I
don't know details -- if you do, please let me know.


UUCP makes use of the -f (set return path address, i.e. from whom the
mail is) option of masqmail which is only permitted for user root,
the trusted user (usually `mail'), and the trusted group (often group
`mail'). UUCP, however, usually runs as user and group `uucp'.

Masqmail currently supports only one trusted group and it is planned
to remain so for simplicity reasons. (If you have good arguments on
the case, try to convince me of the opposite.) Therefore the solution
for masqmail is to add the user `uucp' to the trusted group (often
group `mail'):

    usermod -G mail -a uucp

This is not the perfect solution but an acceptable trade-off.


If one really needs to enable user `uucp' to set -f but can not add
it to the trusted group, see the comment in is_privileged_user() in
permissions.c. It shows a hack which allows to trust another group,
for instance the group `uucp'.


See [1] for reasons why -f is important and needed.

[1] http://bugs.hylafax.org/show_bug.cgi?id=842


meillo
